      03 A First Problem:
       Stable Matching
CS216 Algorithm Design and Analysis (H)

             Instructor: Shan Chen
          chens3@sustech.edu.cn



                                          1
               Stable Matching
   • Motivation: [Gale and Shapley 1962]
             Ø Can one design a college admissions process, or job recruiting process, that is
               self-enforcing (stable)?
   • Example: A “bare-bones” version of job recruiting
             Ø m applicants and n companies
             Ø Each applicant ranks companies and each company ranks applicants
             Ø Each company may hire one or multiple applicants.
   • Let’s first look at a simpler setting: one-to-one matching (e.g., marriage)
             Ø n men: A = { m1 , m2 , …, mn } and n women: B = { w1 , w2 , …, wn }
             Ø Each man can be married to at most one woman and vice versa.
             Ø A matching M is a subset of the Cartesian product A x B.

                                                                                            2
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Some Definitions
   • Perfect Matching: everyone is matched monogamously (一夫一妻)
             Ø Each man gets exactly one woman.
             Ø Each woman gets exactly one man.
   • Stability: no pair of participants has incentive to undermine the current
     matching by joint action
             Ø In a matching M, an unmatched pair m - w is unstable if man m and woman w
               prefer each other to their current partners.
             Ø An unstable pair m - w could each improve by joint action (e.g., eloping).

   • Stable Matching: perfect matching with no unstable pairs


                                                                                       3
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               The Stable Marriage/Matching Problem
   • The Stable Marriage/Matching Problem. Given the preference lists of
     n men and n women, find a stable matching if one exists.

   • Example 1 (n = 2): [m1: w1 > w2 ; m2: w1 > w2 ; w1: m1 > m2 ; w2: m1 > m2]
             Ø The stable matching {m1 - w1 , m2 - w2} is unique.
               üThe other perfect matching {m1 - w2 , m2 - w1} has an unstable pair m1 - w1.
   • Example 2 (n = 2): [m1: w1 > w2 ; m2: w2 > w1 ; w1: m2 > m1 ; w2: m1 > m2]
             Ø Both perfect matchings are stable:
               ü{m1 - w1 , m2 - w2}: both men are happy
               ü{m1 - w2 , m2 - w1}: both women are happy


                                                                                           4
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Questions
   • Q. Do stable matchings always exist in general?
   • A. No. See the counterexample (not a marriage problem) below.
                                           1st           2nd            3rd
                                                                                       no perfect matching is stable:
                           A                B             C              D
                           B                C             A              D             {A – B, C – D} => B – C unstable
                           C                A             B              D             {A – C, B – D} => A – B unstable
                           D                A             B              C             {A – D, B – C} => A – C unstable


   • Q. Does there exist stable matchings for the marriage problem?
   • Q. How can we find such a stable matching?

                                                                                                                          5
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               The Gale-Shapley Algorithm
   • The Gale-Shapley algorithm. [Gale-Shapley 1962] An intuitive method
     that guarantees to find a stable matching.
             Ø also known as the propose-and-reject or delayed-acceptance algorithm
             Ø Idea: men propose to preferred women (but may get rejected) until all matched
                        Initialize each person to be free.
                        while (some man is free and hasn't proposed to every woman) {
                            Choose such a man m
                            w = 1st woman on m's list to whom m has not yet proposed
                            if (w is free)
                                assign m and w to be engaged
                            else if (w prefers m to her fiancé m')
                                assign m and w to be engaged, and m' to be free
                            else
                                w rejects m
                        }
                                                                                        6
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Proof of Correctness: Termination
   • Observation 1. Men propose to women in decreasing preference order.
   • Observation 2. Women only “trade up”: once a woman is matched, she
     never becomes unmatched.

   • Claim. Algorithm terminates after at most n2 iterations of the while loop.
   • Pf. Each time through the while loop a man proposes to a new woman.
     There are only n2 possible proposals. ▪

   • Q. Can you think of a scenario that requires Θ(n2) steps for GS?
   • A. E.g., all men ranks women in the same order, and all women ranks
     men in the opposite order.
                                                                                       7
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Proof of Correctness: Perfection
   • Claim. All men and women are uniquely matched.
   • Pf. (by contradiction)
             Ø        Suppose that some man Zeus is not matched upon termination of algorithm.
             Ø        Then some woman, say Amy, is not matched upon termination.
             Ø        By Observation 2, Amy was never proposed to.
             Ø        But Zeus proposed to everyone, since he ends up unmatched. Contradiction! ▪




                                                                                            8
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Proof of Correctness: Stability
   • Claim. There exist no unstable pairs.
   • Pf. (by contradiction)
             Ø Suppose Z - A is an unstable pair (see the bottom-right figure), i.e., each prefers
               each other to their current partner in the Gale-Shapley matching S*.
             Ø Case 1: Z never proposed to A.
               üZ prefers B to A.         men propose in decreasing order of preference
               üSo, Z - A is stable.
                                                                                             S*
             Ø Case 2: Z proposed to A but got rejected (right away or later)
                                                                                        Zeus - Bertha
               üA prefers Y to Z.         women only trade up
                                                                                        Yancey - Amy
               üSo, Z - A is stable.                                                         ...
             Ø In either case, Z - A is stable. Contradiction! ▪


                                                                                                 9
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Quick Summary and Questions
   • The Stable Marriage Problem. Given n men and n women, and their
     preferences, find a stable matching if one exists.
   • The Gale-Shapley algorithm. Guarantees to find a stable matching for
     any problem instance.

   • Q. How to implement the GS algorithm efficiently?
   • Q. If there are multiple stable matchings, which one does GS find?




                                                                                       10
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Efficient O(n2) Implementation
   • Representing men and women.
             Ø Assume men and women are each named 1, …, n.
   • Recording the matching.
             Ø Maintain a list of free men, e.g., in a queue or stack.
             Ø Maintain two arrays wife[m], and husband[w].
               üSet entries to 0 if unmatched.
               üIf m matches w, then wife[m] = w and husband[w] = m.
   • Men proposing.
             Ø For each man, maintain a list of women, ordered by preference.
             Ø Keep an array count[m] that counts the number of proposals made by man m.


                                                                                       11
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Efficient O(n2) Implementation
   • Women accepting/rejecting.
             Ø How can we efficiently check if woman w prefers man m to man m’ ?
             Ø For each woman, create an inverse mapping from men to preference orders.
               üO(1) access for each query after O(n) preprocessing

                    Amy               1st        2nd        3rd        4th        5th   6th   7th   8th     for i = 1 to n
                     pref              8          3          7          1          4    5     6     2          inverse[pref[i]] = i


                    Amy                1          2          3          4          5    6     7     8     E.g., Amy prefers man 3 to 6 since
                  inverse             4th        8th        2nd        5th        6th   7th   3rd   1st     inverse[3] = 2 < 7 = inverse[6]


   • Memory. It is not hard to see that GS consumes O(n2) memory.
             Ø Input and output also take memory!
                                                                                                                                               12
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Understanding the Solution
   • Q. For a given problem instance, there may be several stable matchings.
     Do all GS executions yield the same stable matching? If so, which one?

   • Def. Man m is a valid partner of woman w if there exists some stable
     matching in which they are matched.
   • Def. The man-optimal matching: every man receives best valid partner.
   • Claim. All GS executions yield the man-optimal matching, which is also a
     stable matching! Very surprising, isn’t it?
             Ø The man-optimal matching is simultaneously best for all men.
             Ø No reason to believe that the man-optimal matching exists, let alone stable!


                                                                                          13
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Man Optimality
   • Claim. The GS matching S* is man-optimal.
   • Pf. (by contradiction)
             Ø Suppose S* is not man-optimal, i.e., some man is not paired with his best valid
               partner. Since men proposed in decreasing order of preference, some man is
               rejected by his valid partner.
             Ø Let Y be the first such man and let A be the first valid partner of Y that rejects Y.
             Ø When Y is rejected, A (re)affirms matching with a man, say Z, whom A prefers
               to Y. We know Z was not rejected by any valid partner at this point, so Z prefers
               A to any other valid partners.         since A is a valid partner of Y       S
             Ø There exists a stable matching S where Y and A are matched.             Yancey-Amy
               Let B be Z’s valid partner in S. From above, Z prefers A to B.          Zeus-Bertha
             Ø Also, A prefers Z to Y, so Z - A is unstable in S. Contradiction! ▪         ...


                                                                                               14
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Woman Pessimality
   • Q. Does man-optimality come at the expense of the women?

   • Def. Woman-pessimal assignment: every woman gets worst valid partner.
   • Claim. The GS matching S* is woman-pessimal.
   • Pf. (by contradiction)
             Ø Suppose Z - A is matched in S*, but Z is not the worst valid partner for A.
             Ø There exists a stable matching S in which A is paired with a man,          S
               say Y, whom A likes less than Z. Let B be Z’s valid partner in S.     Yancey-Amy
             Ø From man-optimality of S*, we have Z prefers A to B.                  Zeus-Bertha
             Ø Recall A prefers Z to Y, so Z - A is unstable in S. Contradiction! ▪      ...



                                                                                             15
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Gale-Shapley Algorithm: Summary
   • The Gale-Shapley algorithm. Finds a stable matching in O(n2) time.
   • Man Optimality. In the version of the GS algorithm where men propose,
     each man receives best valid partner.
   • Woman Pessimality. In the version of the GS algorithm where men
     propose, each woman receives worst valid partner.

   • Q. If you want a best mate, would you propose or wait to be proposed?




                                                                                       16
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Extension: Matching Students to Hospitals
   • Extension: hospitals hire medical students
             Ø Variant 1. Participants declare others as unacceptable.                                                    some student is unwilling
                                                                                                                          to work in some hospitals,
             Ø Variant 2. Unequal number of positions and students.                                                       or the other way.
             Ø Variant 3. Limited polygamy.
                                                                                       some hospital could hire multiple students, e.g., ≤ 3

   • In Assignment 1, you will be asked to prove that Gale-Shapley can be
     adapted to find stable matchings in the above generalized setting.
             Ø To prove it, you need to first define stable matching in this setting.




                                                                                                                                               17
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Men/Women ≠ Hospitals/Students
   • Men/Women Marriage: one-to-one matching
   • Hospitals/Students Recruitment: one-to-many matching

   • For around 20 years, most people thought the above problems had very
     similar properties. However, this is wrong.
             Ø [Roth 1982] Any algorithm for men/women marriage (e.g., man-proposing GS)
               that yields a man-optimal stable matching implies that truth telling is the
               dominant strategy for men.
             Ø [Roth 1985] No stable matching algorithm for hospitals/students recruitment
               exists such that truth-telling is the dominant strategy for hospitals.



                                                                                                 18
Slides by John P. Dickerson. Copyright © 2016 Carnegie Mellon University. All rights reserved.
               Real-World Application: NRMP
   • National Resident Matching Program (NRMP):
             Ø         The algorithm is an extension to GS but was in practical use before GS!
             Ø         Original use in 1950s, just after WWII.     predates computer usage
             Ø         Initial version does not handle couples and other special cases.
             Ø         The full algorithm was adopted and used since late 1990s.

   • Rural hospital dilemma. Certain hospitals (mainly in rural areas) are
     unpopular and declared unacceptable by many students.
             Ø How can we find stable matchings that benefit “rural hospitals”?
   • Rural hospital theorem. [Roth 1986] Rural hospitals get exactly the same
     students in every stable matching!

                                                                                                 19
Slides by John P. Dickerson. Copyright © 2016 Carnegie Mellon University. All rights reserved.
               2012 Nobel Prize in Economics
   • Lloyd Shapley. Stable matching
     theory and Gale-Shapley algorithm.




   • Alvin Roth. Applied Gale-Shapley to
     matching med-school students with
     hospitals, students with schools, and
     organ donors with patients.


                                                                                       20
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               More on Stable Matching
   • The stable roommate problem:
             Ø Matching is defined on general graphs (may be non-bipartite)
             Ø Stable matchings may not exist!

   • Q. Can we find a polynomial-time algorithm that does the following?
             Ø either finds a stable matching
             Ø or reports non-existence
   • A. Irving’s algorithm [Irving 1985]
             Ø builds on GS ideas and work by [McVitie and Wilson 1971].



                                                                                                 21
Slides by John P. Dickerson. Copyright © 2016 Carnegie Mellon University. All rights reserved.
               Lessons Learned
   • Powerful ideas of algorithm design and analysis:
             Ø Isolate underlying structure of the problem.
             Ø Design useful and efficient algorithms.
             Ø Prove correctness and bound time and memory.

   • Caveat. Potentially deep social ramifications. [legal disclaimer]




                                                                                       22
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
   Announcements
• Assignment 1 has been released and the deadline is Mar 18.

• Lab 2 will be released today and the deadline is Mar 18.




                                                               23
