08 Computational Intractability
 CS216 Algorithm Design and Analysis (H)

              Instructor: Shan Chen
           chens3@sustech.edu.cn



                                           1
               Algorithm Design Patterns and Antipatterns
   • Algorithm design pa1erns:
             Ø         Greedy
             Ø         Divide and Conquer
             Ø         Dynamic Programming
             Ø         Duality (e.g., Network Flow)
             Ø         ReducAons
             Ø         RandomizaAon
   • Algorithm design an3pa1erns:
             Ø NP-completeness                                                         Polynomial-Ame algorithm unlikely
             Ø PSPACE-completeness                                                     Polynomial-Ame cerAﬁcaAon algorithm unlikely
             Ø Undecidability                                                          No algorithm possible

                                                                                                                                 2
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
1. Polynomial-Time Reduc3ons



                               3
               Classify Problems by Computational Requirements
   • Q. Which problems will we be able to solve in prac3ce?
   • A working deﬁni3on. Those with polynomial-3me (poly-3me) algorithms.




                                                                                           Turing machine, word RAM,
   • Theory. Deﬁni3on is broad and robust.                                                     uniform circuits, …

   • Prac3ce. Polynomial-3me algorithms scale to huge problems.
                                                                                       constants tend to be small, e.g., 3n2
                                                                                                                               4
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
   Classify Problems by Computa5onal Requirements
• Q. Which problems will we be able to solve in prac3ce?
• A working deﬁni3on. Those with polynomial-3me (poly-3me)
  algorithms.
                        Yes                    Probably No

                   Shortest Path               Longest Path

                     Matching                  3D Matching

                      Min Cut                    Max Cut

                      2-SAT                      3-SAT

                   Planar 4-Color             Planar 3-Color

               Bipartite Vertex Cover         Vertex Cover

                 Primality Testing              Factoring

                Linear Programming      Integer Linear Programming
                                                                     5
               Classify Problems
   • Goal. Classify problems according to those that can be solved in
     polynomial 3me and those that cannot.
   • Provably requires exponen3al 3me:                     input size = c + log k

             Ø Given a constant-size program, does it halt in at most k steps?
             Ø Given a board posiAon in an n-by-n generalizaAon of checkers, can black
               guarantee a win?
                                                                                       forced capture rule




   • Frustra3ng news. Huge number of fundamental problems have deﬁed
     classiﬁca3on for decades.
                                                                                                         6
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
   Polynomial-Time Reduc<ons
• Q. Suppose we could solve problem Y in polynomial time. What else
  could we solve in polynomial time?
• Reduction. Problem X polynomial-time (Cook) reduces to problem Y if
  arbitrary instances of problem X can be solved using:   don’t confuse with
   Ø Polynomial number of standard computational steps, plus              “reduce from”
   Ø Polynomial number of calls to oracle that solves problem Y.
                                            can be viewed as a magic black box




                                        computational model supplemented by special piece
                                       of hardware that solves instances of Y in a single step

                                                                                       7
               Polynomial-Time Reduc<ons
   • Q. Suppose we could solve problem Y in polynomial time. What else
     could we solve in polynomial time?
   • Reduction. Problem X polynomial-time (Cook) reduces to problem Y if
     arbitrary instances of problem X can be solved using:   don’t confuse with
             Ø Polynomial number of standard computational steps, plus                                                “reduce from”
             Ø Polynomial number of calls to oracle that solves problem Y.
                                                                                         can be viewed as a magic black box
                                                                 Karp reduction allows
                                                                  only one oracle call
   • Notation. X £ P Y
   • Note. We pay for time to write down instances of Y sent to black box ⇒
     instances of Y must be of polynomial size.

                                                                                                                                 8
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Polynomial-Time Reduc<ons
   • Design algorithms. If X £ P Y and Y can be solved in polynomial 3me,
     then X can also be solved in polynomial 3me.

   • Establish intractability. If X £ P Y and X cannot be solved in polynomial
     3me, then Y cannot be solved in polynomial 3me.
                                                                                       up to cost of reduction

   • Establish equivalence. If both X £ P Y and Y £ P X, we use nota3on X º P Y.
     In this case, X can be solved in polynomial 3me if and only if Y can be.

   • Bo1om line. Reduc3ons classify problems according to rela3ve diﬃculty.

                                                                                                                 9
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
2. Reduc(ons By Simple
      Equivalence
    Basic reduc+on strategies:
    § Reduc&ons by simple equivalence
    § Reduc&ons from special case to general case
    § Reduc&ons via “gadgets”



                                                    10
               Independent Set
   • INDEPENDENT-SET. Given a graph G = (V, E) and an integer k, is there a
     subset S of ≥ k ver3ces such that no two ver3ces in S are adjacent?
             Ø An independent set S has no edge connecAng verAces in S.
   • Example. Is there an independent set of size ≥ 6 ? Yes.
   • Example. Is there an independent set of size ≥ 7 ? No.




                                                                                       independent set




                                                                                                         11
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Vertex Cover
   • VERTEX-COVER. Given a graph G = (V, E) and an integer k, is there a
     subset S of ≤ k ver3ces such that each edge is incident to at least one
     vertex in S ?
   • Example. Is there a vertex cover of size ≤ 4 ? Yes.
   • Example. Is there a vertex cover of size ≤ 3 ? No.




                                                                                       vertex cover




                                                                                                      12
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Vertex Cover and Independent Set
   • Theorem. INDEPENDENT-SET º P VERTEX-COVER
   • Pf. We show S is an independent set if and only if V – S is a vertex cover.




                                                                                       independent set
                                                                                       vertex cover




                                                                                                         13
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Vertex Cover and Independent Set
   • Theorem. INDEPENDENT-SET º P VERTEX-COVER
   • Pf. We show S is an independent set if and only if V – S is a vertex cover.
             “only if” ⇒: Let S be any independent set.
                 üConsider an arbitrary edge (u, v) Î E.
                 üS independent ⇒ u Ï S or v Ï S ⇒ u Î V – S or v Î V – S.
                 üThus, V – S covers (u, v).
             “if” ⇐: Let V – S be any vertex cover.
                 üConsider an arbitrary edge (u, v) Î E.
                 üV – S is a vertex cover ⇒ u Î V – S or v Î V – S ⇒ u Ï S or v Ï S.
                 üThus, S is an independent set. ▪



                                                                                       14
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
3. Reductions from Special
   Case to General Case
     Basic reduc+on strategies:
      § Reduc&ons by simple equivalence
      § Reduc&ons from special case to general case
      § Reduc&ons via “gadgets”



                                                      15
               Set Cover
   • SET-COVER. Given a set U of elements, a collec3on of subsets of U, and
     an integer k, are there ≤ k of these subsets whose union is equal to U?
   • Sample applica3on:
             Ø         Consider m available pieces of soSware.
             Ø         Set U consists of n capabiliAes that we would like our system to have.
             Ø         The i-th piece of soSware provides the subset Si ⊆ U of capabiliAes.
             Ø         Goal: achieve all n capabiliAes using fewest pieces of soSware.
   • Example:
                                                   U = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 }         k=2

                                                   S1 = {3, 7}       S4 = {2, 4}
                                                   S2 = {3, 4, 5, 6} S5 = {5}
                                                   S3 = {1}          S6 = {1, 2, 6, 7}

                                                                                                16
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Vertex Cover Reduces to Set Cover
   • Theorem. VERTEX-COVER £ P SET-COVER
   • Pf. Given a VERTEX-COVER instance G = (V, E) and k, we construct a SET-
     COVER instance (U, S, k) such that it has set cover of size k if and only if G
     has a vertex cover of size k.
   • Construc3on. U = E, Sv = {e Î E : e incident to v}, S = {Sv : v Î V}.
   • Example:
            VERTEX COVER                                a                               b            SET COVER (k = 2)
                (k = 2)
                                              e7             e2                             e4
                                                                                       e3            U = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 }
                                      f                                   e6                     c   Sa = {3, 7}         Sb = {2, 4}
                                                                                                     Sc = {3, 4, 5, 6} Sd = {5}
                                                  e1                                        e5
                                                                                                     Se = {1}            Sf= {1, 2, 6, 7}
                                                            e                           d
                                                                                                                                            17
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Vertex Cover Reduces to Set Cover
   • Theorem. VERTEX-COVER £ P SET-COVER
   • Pf. Given a VERTEX-COVER instance G = (V, E) and k, we construct a SET-
     COVER instance (U, S, k) such that it has set cover of size k if and only if G
     has a vertex cover of size k.
   • Construc3on. U = E, Sv = {e Î E : e incident to v}, S = {Sv : v Î V}.
   • Lemma. G = (V, E) contains a vertex cover of size k if and only if (U, S, k)
     contains a set cover of size k.
   • Pf. Let X ⊆ V be a vertex cover of size k; let Y ⊆ S be a set cover of size k.
             Ø “only if” ⇒: Y = { Sv : v ∈ X } is a set cover of size k.
             Ø “if” ⇐: X = { v : Sv ∈ Y } is a vertex cover of size k. ▪


                                                                                       18
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
4. Reduc(ons via “Gadgets”
      Basic reduction strategies:
      § Reductions by simple equivalence
      § Reductions from special case to general case
      § Reductions via “gadgets”



                                                       19
               Sa<sﬁability
   • Q. Given a proposi3onal formula F, is there a truth assignment to its
     variables such that F = 1, i.e., is there a sa3sfying truth assignment?
   • Example:                        yes           no




   • Key applica3on. Electronic design automa3on (EDA).

                                                                                       20
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Satisfiability: SAT and 3-SAT
   • Literal. A Boolean variable or its nega3on.         𝑥! or 𝑥&!
   • Clause. A disjunc3on of literals.                   𝐶" = 𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁𝑥%
   • Conjunc3ve Normal Form (CNF). A proposi3onal
                                                         Φ = 𝐶# ⋀ 𝐶$ ⋀ 𝐶% ⋀ 𝐶&
     formula F that is the conjunc3on of clauses.
   • SAT. Given a CNF formula F, does it have a sa3sfying truth assignment?
   • 3-SAT. SAT where each clause contains exactly 3 literals (and each literal
     corresponds to a diﬀerent variable).
   • Example:
                                                 F = 𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥% ⋀(𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥%)⋀(𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥&)
                                              yes assignment: x1 = true, x2 = true, x3 = false, x4 = false


                                                                                                             21
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Satisfiability is Hard
   • Hypothesis. There does not exist a polynomial-3me algorithm for 3-SAT.
   • Remark. This hypothesis is equivalent to P ≠ NP conjecture.




                                                                                       22
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               3-Sa<sﬁability Reduces to Independent Set
   • Theorem. 3-SAT £ P INDEPENDENT-SET
   • Pf idea. Given 3-SAT instance F, construct an INDEPENDENT-SET instance
     (G, k) that has an independent set of size k (k = |F|) iﬀ F is sa3sﬁable.
   • Construc3on:                                          number of clauses

             Ø G contains 3 verAces for each clause, one for each literal.
             Ø Connect 3 literals in a clause in a triangle.
             Ø Connect literal to each of its negaAons.
   • Example:                                                   𝑥!                          𝑥"             𝑥!

                            G

                                                      𝑥"                  𝑥#           𝑥!        𝑥#   𝑥"        𝑥$
                        k=3                   F = 𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥% ⋀ (𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥%) ⋀ (𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥&)
                                                                                                                     23
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               3-Sa<sﬁability Reduces to Independent Set
   • Lemma. F is satisfiable iff G contains independent set of size k = |F|.
   • Pf. “only if” ⇒:
             Ø Consider any satisfying assignment for F.
             Ø Choose one true literal from each clause/triangle:
               üno two literals chosen in one triangle
               ücomplementary literals not both chosen
             Ø This is an independent set of size k = |F|.
                                                                𝑥!                          𝑥"             𝑥!

                            G

                                                     𝑥"                  𝑥#            𝑥!        𝑥#   𝑥"        𝑥$
                        k=3                   F = 𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥% ⋀ (𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥%) ⋀ (𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥&)
                                                                                                                     24
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               3-Sa<sﬁability Reduces to Independent Set
   • Lemma. F is satisfiable iff G contains independent set of size k = |F|.
   • Pf. “if” ⇐:
             Ø        Let S be an independent set of size k = |F|.
             Ø        At most one vertex in each triangle can be contained in an independent set.
             Ø        S must contain exactly one vertex in each triangle.
             Ø        Set these literals to true (and remaining literals consistently).
             Ø        All clauses in F are satisfied. ▪
                                                                𝑥!                          𝑥"             𝑥!

                            G

                                                     𝑥"                  𝑥#            𝑥!        𝑥#   𝑥"        𝑥$
                        k=3                   F = 𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥% ⋀ (𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥%) ⋀ (𝑥# ⋁ 𝑥$ ⋁ 𝑥&)
                                                                                                                     25
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Reduc<ons: Quick Summary
   • Basic reduction strategies:
             Ø Simple equivalence: INDEPENDENT-SET º P VERTEX-COVER
             Ø Special case to general case: VERTEX-COVER £ P SET-COVER
             Ø Encoding with “gadgets”: 3-SAT £ P INDEPENDENT-SET

   • Transitivity. If X £ P Y and Y £ P Z, then X £ P Z.
   • Pf idea. Compose the two algorithms.

   • Example. 3-SAT £ P INDEPENDENT-SET £ P VERTEX-COVER £ P SET-COVER



                                                                                       26
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Polynomial-Time Reduc<ons in Textbook
                                                                 u c es to                 3-SAT
                                                                d
                                                       ti me r e ET
                                                T poly- DENT-S
                                            3-SA DEPEN
                                               IN

                         INDEPENDENT-SET                               DIR-HAM-CYCLE                   GRAPH 3-COLOR    SUBSET-SUM




                             VERTEX-COVER                                  HAM-CYCLE                   PLANAR 3-COLOR    KNAPSACK


                                                                                        3D-Matching       coloring      numerical
                                 SET-COVER                                        TSP
                                                                                        partitioning
                  packing and covering                                    sequencing                    [section 8.5-8.8 of textbook]

                                                                                                              Assignment 6
                                                                                                                                        27
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Karp’s Poly-Time Reductions from SAT




                                                                                        Richard M. Karp
                                                                                       1985 Turing Award




                                                                                                  28
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Exercise: Three Types of Problems
   • Decision Problem. Does there exist a vertex cover of size ≤ k?
   • Search Problem. Find a vertex cover of size ≤ k.
   • Op3miza3on Problem. Find a vertex cover of minimum size.

   • Note. The above are all variants of the vertex cover problem.

   • Q. Can you prove that the above 3 problems polynomial-3me reduce to
     each other?



                                                                                       29
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Decision Problems vs. Search Problems
   • VERTEX-COVER. Does there exist a vertex cover of size ≤ k?
   • FIND-VERTEX-COVER. Find a vertex cover of size ≤ k.

   • Theorem. VERTEX-COVER º P FIND-VERTEX-COVER
   • Pf. ≤P: Decision problem is a special case of search problem.
      ≥P: To ﬁnd a vertex cover of size ≤ k:
             Ø Determine if there exists a vertex cover of size ≤ k.
             Ø Find a vertex v such that G − {v} has a vertex cover of size ≤ k − 1.
               (Any vertex in any vertex cover of size ≤ k will have this property.)
             Ø Include v in the vertex cover.                                  run VERTEX-COVER
             Ø Recursively ﬁnd a vertex cover of size ≤ k − 1 in G − {v}. ▪ algorithm n = |V| times
                                                                               delete v and all incident edges
                                                                                                                 30
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Search Problems vs. Optimization Problems
   • FIND-VERTEX-COVER. Find a vertex cover of size ≤ k.
   • FIND-MIN-VERTEX-COVER. Find a vertex cover of minimum size.

   • Theorem. FIND-VERTEX-COVER º P FIND-MIN-VERTEX-COVER
   • Pf. ≤P: Search problem is a special case of op3miza3on problem.
      ≥P: To ﬁnd a vertex cover of minimum size:
             Ø Binary search (or linear search) for size k* of minimum vertex cover.
             Ø Solve search problem for min size k* to ﬁnd the minimum vertex cover. ▪




                                                                                         31
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
   Announcement
• Assignment 6 has been released and the deadline is Jun 5, Friday.




                                                                      32
5. P vs. NP


              33
               P
   • Decision problem:
             Ø Problem X is a set of strings.
             Ø Instance s is one string.
             Ø Algorithm A solves problem X: A(s) = yes if and only if s Î X.
   • Def. Algorithm A runs in polynomial time if for every string s:
     A(s) terminates in ≤ p(|s|) “steps”, for some polynomial function p(×).
                                                                                       length of s

   • P. Set of decision problems for which there exists a poly-time algorithm.
   • Example:                                                      on a deterministic
                                                                                                     Turing machine



                                                                                                             34
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Some Problems in P
   • P. Decision problems for which there exists a poly-time algorithm.




                                                                                       35
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               NP
   • Cer3ﬁca3on intui3on:
             Ø CerAﬁer 验证器 views things from “managerial” viewpoint.
             Ø CerAﬁer doesn’t determine whether s Î X on its own; rather, it checks a
               proposed cerAﬁcate 证据 t that shows s Î X.
   • Def. Algorithm C(s, t) is a cer3ﬁer for problem X if for every string s:
     s Î X if and only if there exists a string t such that C(s, t) = yes.
   • NP. Set of decision problems for which there exists a poly-3me cer3ﬁer.
             Ø C(s, t) is a polynomial-Ame algorithm.
             Ø CerAﬁcate t is of polynomial size: |t| ≤ p(|s|) for some polynomial p(×).
                                                       also called “witness” or “proof”

   • Remark. NP stands for nondeterminis3c polynomial 3me.

                                                                                           36
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Certifiers and Certificates: Composites
   • COMPOSITES. Given an integer s, is s a composite number?

   • Cer+ﬁcate. A non-trivial factor t of s.
             Ø Note that such a cerAﬁcate exists if and only if s is composite. Also, |t| £ |s|.
   • Cer+ﬁer. Grade-school division.
   • Example:


   • Conclusion. COMPOSITES Î NP


                                                                                             37
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Cer<ﬁers and Cer<ﬁcates: Sa<sﬁability
   • SAT. Given a CNF formula F, is there a sa3sfying truth assignment?
   • 3-SAT. SAT where each clause contains exactly 3 literals.

   • Cer+ﬁcate. An assignment of truth values to the Boolean variables.
   • Cer+ﬁer. Check that each clause in F has at least one true literal.
   • Example:



   • Conclusions. SAT Î NP, 3-SAT Î NP.
                                                                                       38
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Certifiers and Certificates: Hamiltonian Path
   • HAMILTONIAN-PATH. Given an undirected graph G = (V, E), does there
     exist a simple path that visits every node?

   • Cer+ﬁcate. A permuta3on π of the n nodes.
   • Cer+ﬁer. Check that π contains each node in V exactly once,
     and that G contains an edge between each pair of adjacent nodes in π.
   • Example:

   • Conclusion.
     HAMILTONIAN-PATH Î NP
                                                                                       39
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Some Problems in NP
   • NP. Decision problems for which there exists a poly-3me cer3ﬁer.




                                                                                       40
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Significance of NP
   • NP. Decision problems for which there exists a poly-3me cer3ﬁer.


               ” NP captures vast domains of computational, scientific, and mathematical
               endeavors, and seems to roughly delimit what mathematicians and scientists
               have been aspiring to compute feasibly. ”    — Christos Papadimitriou




               ” In an ideal world it would be renamed P vs VP. ”                                             — Clyde Kruskal


                                                                                       verifiable in polynomial time



                                                                                                                                41
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               P ⊆ NP
   • P. Decision problems for which there is a poly-time algorithm.
   • NP. Decision problems for which there is a poly-time certifier.

   • Theorem. P ⊆ NP
   • Pf. Consider any problem X Î P:
             Ø By definition, there exists a poly-time algorithm A(s) that solves X.
             Ø Certificate: t = ε (empty string), certifier C(s, t) = A(s). ▪




                                                                                       42
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               NP ⊆ EXP
   • NP. Decision problems for which there is a poly-3me cer3ﬁer.
   • EXP. Decision problems for which there is an exponen3al-3me algorithm.

   • Theorem. NP ⊆ EXP
   • Pf. Consider any problem X Î NP:
             Ø By deﬁniAon, there exists a poly-Ame cerAﬁer C(s, t) for X, where cerAﬁcate t
               saAsﬁes |t| ≤ p(|s|) for some polynomial p(⋅).
             Ø To solve instance s, run C(s, t) on all strings t with |t| ≤ p(|s|).
             Ø Return yes iﬀ C(s, t) returns yes for any of these potenAal cerAﬁcates. ▪

   • Fact. P ≠ EXP ⇒ either P ≠ NP, or NP ≠ EXP, or both.
                                                                                          43
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               The Main Ques<on: P vs. NP
   • Q. How to solve an instance of 3-SAT with n variables?
   • A. Exhaustive search: try all 2n truth assignments.

   • Q. Can we do anything substantially more clever?
   • Conjecture. No poly-time algorithm for 3-SAT.
                                                                 “intractable”




                                                                                       44
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               The Main Ques<on: P vs. NP
   • Does P = NP? [Cook 1971, Edmonds, Levin, Yablonski, Gödel]
             Ø Is the decision problem as easy as the cerAﬁcaAon problem?
             Ø One of Millennium Problems by Clay MathemaAcs InsAtute: $ 1 million prize

                                               EXP                  NP                 EXP
                                                             P                                P = NP

                                                                                                         break RSA cryptosystem and
                                                                                                          potentially crash economy
                                                            If P ≠ NP                        If P = NP

   • If yes... Eﬃcient algorithms for 3-SAT, TSP, VERTEX-COVER, FACTOR...
   • If no... No eﬃcient algorithms possible for 3-SAT, TSP, VERTEX-COVER...
   • Consensus opinion. Probably no.
                                                                                                                               45
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Possible Outcomes: P ≠ NP
      “ I conjecture that there is no good algorithm for the traveling salesman problem.
      My reasons are the same as for any mathematical conjecture: (i) It is a legitimate
      mathematical possibility and (ii) I do not know.”              — Jack Edmonds (1966)


      “ In my view, there is no way to even make intelligent guesses about the answer to any
      of these questions. If I had to bet now, I would bet that P is not equal to NP.
      I estimate the half-life of this problem at 25–50 more years, but I wouldn’t bet on it
      being solved before 2100. ”                                       — Bob Tarjan (2002)


      “ We seem to be missing even the most basic understanding of the nature of its
      difficulty... All approaches tried so far probably (in some cases, provably) have failed.
      In this sense P = NP is different from many other major mathematical problems on
      which a gradual progress was being constantly done (sometimes for centuries)
      whereupon they yielded, either completely or partially. ” — Alexander Razborov (2002)
                                                                                            46
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Possible Outcomes: P = NP

                   “ I think that in this respect I am on the loony fringe of the mathematical
                   community: I think (not too strongly!) that P = NP and this will be proved
                   within twenty years. Some years ago, Charles Read and I worked on it
                   quite bit, and we even had a celebratory dinner in a good restaurant
                   before we found an absolutely fatal mistake. ”       — Béla Bollobás (2002)


                   “ In my opinion this shouldn’t really be a hard problem; it’s just that we
                   came late to this theory, and haven’t yet developed any techniques for
                   proving computations to be hard. Eventually, it will just be a footnote in
                   the books. ”                                              — John Conway




                                                                                                   47
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Other Possible Outcomes
   • P = NP, but only Ω(n100) algorithm for 3-SAT.
   • P ≠ NP, but with O(nlog*n) algorithm for 3-SAT.
   • P = NP is independent (of ZFC axioma3c set theory).
                                                                      can neither prove nor disprove



          “ It will be solved by either 2048 or 4096. I am currently somewhat pessimistic.
          The outcome will be the truly worst case scenario: namely that someone will
          prove P = NP because there are only finitely many obstructions to the opposite
          hypothesis; hence there exists a polynomial time solution to SAT but we will
          never know its complexity! ”                                  — Donald Knuth



                                                                                                       48
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
6. NP-Complete


                 49
               Two Types of Reduc<ons
   • Def. Problem X polynomial (Cook) reduces to problem Y if arbitrary
     instances of problem X can be solved using:
             Ø Polynomial number of standard computaAonal steps, plus
             Ø Polynomial number of calls to oracle that solves problem Y.
   • Def. Problem X polynomial (Karp) transforms to problem Y if given any
     instance x of X, we can construct an instance y of Y such that x is a yes
     instance of X iﬀ y is a yes instance of Y. we require |y| to be of size polynomial in |x|
   • Note. Polynomial transforma3on is polynomial reduc3on with just one
     call to oracle for Y, exactly at the end of the algorithm for X. Almost all
     previous reduc3ons were of this form.
   • Open ques3on. Are these two concepts the same with respect to NP?
                                                                                 we abuse notation £ p and blur distinction   50
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               NP-Complete and NP-Hard
   • NP-Complete. Set of problems Y in NP with the property that for every
     problem X in NP, X £ p Y.
   • NP-Hard. [Bell Labs, Steve Cook, Ron Rivest, Sartaj Sahni]
     Set of problems such that every problem in NP poly-time reduces to it.
             Ø NP-hard problems may not even belong to NP!
   • Theorem. Suppose Y is an NP-complete problem. Then Y Î P iff P = NP.
   • Pf. (“if” + “only if”)
             Ø “if” ⇐: If P = NP then Y Î P because Y Î NP.
             Ø “only if” ⇒: Suppose Y Î P. Consider any problem X Î NP. Since X £ p Y, we
               have X Î P. This implies NP ⊆ P. We already know P ⊆ NP. Thus, P = NP. ▪
   • Fundamental question. Are there any “natural” NP-complete problems?
                                                                                        51
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Circuit Sa<sﬁability
   • CIRCUIT-SAT. Given a combina3onal circuit built out of AND, OR, and
     NOT gates, is there a way to set the circuit inputs so that the output is 1?
                                                                                           output
                                                                                             Ù


                                                                                       ¬                  Ù



                                                                  Ù                         Ú                     Ú

                                                                                                                           yes inputs: 1 0 1
                                                  1                               0                 ?         ?        ?

                                              hard-coded inputs                                         inputs to be set
                                                                                                                                               52
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               The “First” NP-Complete Problem
   • Theorem. [Cook 1971, Levin 1973] CIRCUIT-SAT is NP-complete.
   • Pf idea. (direct proof) reflects basic distinction between algorithms and circuits
             Ø Any determinisAc algorithm that takes a ﬁxed number of bits as input and
               produces a yes/no answer can be represented by such a circuit.
               Moreover, if algorithm runs in polynomial Ame, then circuit is of polynomial size.
             Ø Consider any problem X Î NP. It has a polynomial-Ame cerAﬁer C(s, t).
               To determine whether s Î X, one needs to know if there exists a cerAﬁcate t of
               length p(|s|) such that C(s, t) = yes.
             Ø View C(s, t) as an algorithm on |s| + p(|s|) bits (input s, cerAﬁcate t) and convert
               it into a polynomial-size circuit K.
               üﬁrst |s| bits are hard-coded with s sketchy part of proof: fixing number of bits
               üremaining p(|s|) bits represent bits of t
             Ø Circuit K is saAsﬁable if and only if there exists t such that C(s, t) = yes.
                                                                                             53
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               CIRCUIT-SAT Representa<on Example
   • Example. Construc3on below describes a circuit K such that K is
     sa3sﬁable if and only if graph G has an independent set of size ≥ 2.

                                                                                       independent set?        Ù independent set of size ≥ 2?
                                                                                                       ¬
                                                 both endpoints of some edge
                                                      have been chosen?      Ú
                                                                                             Ú
                                                                                                                              Ú set of size ≥ 2?
                            u
                                                                                        Ù        Ù     Ù              Ú

                 v                    w                                                                           Ù       Ù       Ù

           G = (V, E), n = 3                                                           u-v       u-w   v-w        u       v       w
                                                                                        1         0        1      ?       ?       ?
                                                           𝑛
                                                           2 hard-coded inputs (graph description)                    n inputs (nodes in independent set)
                                                                                                                                                            54
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Establishing NP-Completeness
   • Remark. Once we establish ﬁrst “natural” NP-complete problem, others
     fall like dominoes.
   • Recipe. To prove that Y Î NP-complete:
             Ø Step 1. Show that Y is in NP.
             Ø Step 2. Choose an NP-complete problem X.
             Ø Step 3. Prove that X £ p Y.

   • Theorem. If X Î NP-complete, Y Î NP, X £ P Y, then Y Î NP-complete.
   • Pf. Consider any problem W Î NP. Then W £ P X £ P Y.
             Ø By transiAvity, W £ P Y.
                                                                                       by definition of by assumption
             Ø Hence, Y Î NP-complete. ▪                                                NP-complete

                                                                                                                        55
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               3-SAT is NP-Complete
   • Theorem. 3-SAT is NP-complete.
   • Pf. Suﬃces to show that CIRCUIT-SAT £ P 3-SAT since 3-SAT Î NP.
             Ø Let K be any circuit. Create a 3-SAT variable xi for each circuit element i.
             Ø Make circuit compute correct values at each node:                      output
               üx2 = ¬ x3 ⇒ add 2 clauses:                                               x           0


               üx1 = x4 Ú x5 ⇒ add 3 clauses:                                            Ù

               üx0 = x1 Ù x2 ⇒ add 3 clauses:                                      x         x
                                                                                             1           2

                                                                                   Ú         ¬
             Ø Output value and hard-coded input values:
               üx5 = 0 ⇒ add 1 clause:                                       x         x
                                                                                       5       x 4           3
                                                                                0    ?       ?
               üx0 = 1 ⇒ add 1 clause:
             Ø Final step: turn clauses of length < 3 into clauses of length exactly 3.
               üAdd 1 or 2 new literals for each clause so that they do not aﬀect saAsﬁability. ▪
                                                                                           think how?            56
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Implica<ons of Karp
   • CIRCUIT-SAT polynomial-3me reduces to all problems below (and more).

                                                                                        CIRCUIT-SAT



                                                                 u c es to                3-SAT
                                                           me red T
                                                         i          E
                                                  po ly-t ENT-S
                                                AT PEND
                                            3-S     E
                                                IND

                         INDEPENDENT-SET                               DIR-HAM-CYCLE                  GRAPH 3-COLOR    SUBSET-SUM




                             VERTEX-COVER                                  HAM-CYCLE                  PLANAR 3-COLOR    KNAPSACK


                                                                                        3D-Matching

                                 SET-COVER                                        TSP
                                                                                                                                    57
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Implications of Cook-Levin
   • All problems below (and more) polynomial-3me reduces to CIRCUIT-SAT.

                                                                                        CIRCUIT-SAT
                       SET-COVER poly-time
                     reduces to CIRCUIT-SAT
                                                                                          3-SAT




                         INDEPENDENT-SET                               DIR-HAM-CYCLE                  GRAPH 3-COLOR    SUBSET-SUM




                             VERTEX-COVER                                  HAM-CYCLE                  PLANAR 3-COLOR    KNAPSACK


                                                                                        3D-Matching

                                 SET-COVER                                        TSP
                                                                                                                                    58
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Implications of Karp and Cook-Levin
   • Observa3on. All of the following problems are NP-complete, i.e., they
     are manifesta3ons of the same really hard problem.
                                                                                        CIRCUIT-SAT
                       SET-COVER poly-time
                     reduces to CIRCUIT-SAT
                                                                 u c es to                3-SAT
                                                           me red T
                                                         i          E
                                                  po ly-t ENT-S
                                                AT PEND
                                            3-S     E
                                                IND

                         INDEPENDENT-SET                               DIR-HAM-CYCLE                  GRAPH 3-COLOR    SUBSET-SUM




                             VERTEX-COVER                                  HAM-CYCLE                  PLANAR 3-COLOR    KNAPSACK


                                                                                        3D-Matching

                                 SET-COVER                                        TSP
                                                                                                                                    59
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Some NP-Complete Problems
   • Basic genres of NP-complete problems and paradigma3c examples:
             Ø         Packing/Covering Problems: SET-COVER, VERTEX-COVER, INDEPENDENT-SET.
             Ø         Constraint SaAsfacAon Problems: CIRCUIT-SAT, SAT, 3-SAT.
             Ø         Sequencing Problems: HAMILTONIAN-PATH, HAMILTONIAN-CYCLE, TSP.
             Ø         ParAAoning Problems: 3D-MATCHING, 3-COLOR.
             Ø         Numerical Problems: SUBSET-SUM, KNAPSACK.
   • Prac3ce. Most NP problems are known to be either in P or NP-complete.
   • Notable excep3ons. FACTOR, DISCRETE-LOG, GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM, …

   • Theorem. [Ladner 1975] Unless P = NP, there exist problems in NP that
     are neither in P nor in NP-complete.
                                                                                         60
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               More Hard Computational Problems




                                                                                       61
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Extent and Impact of NP-Completeness
   • Extent of NP-completeness: [Papadimitriou 1995]
             Ø Prime intellectual export of CS to other disciplines.
             Ø 6,000 citaAons per year (more than “compiler”, “OS”, “database”).
             Ø Broad applicability and classiﬁcaAon power.

   • NP-completeness can guide scien3ﬁc inquiry:
             Ø         1926: Ising introduces simple model for phase transiAons.
             Ø         1944: Onsager ﬁnds closed-form soluAon to 2D-ISING in tour de force.
             Ø         19xx: Feynman and other top minds seek soluAon to 3D-ISING.
             Ø         2000: Istrail proves 3D-ISING Î NP-complete.     a holy grail of statistical mechanics

                                                                                       search for closed formula appears doomed

                                                                                                                                  62
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
7. Exploi(ng Intractability


                              63
               Exploi<ng Intractability
   • Q. Is FACTOR Î P?
   • A. Unknown.

   • Challenge. Factor this number:




                                                                                       64
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Exploi<ng Intractability
   • Modern Cryptography:
             Ø E.g., securely browsing on the Internet, digitally sign an e-document, etc.
             Ø Enables freedom of privacy, speech, press, political association.
   • RSA. Based on dichotomy between complexity of two problems.
             Ø To use: generate two random n-bit primes and multiply.
             Ø To break: suffices to factor a 2n-bit integer.




                                             Sold for $2.1 billion

                                                                                                                65
                                                                                       CS 6035 @ Georgia Tech
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
               Factoring on a Quantum Computer
   • Theorem. [Shor 1994] Can factor an n-bit integer in O(n3) steps on a
     quantum computer.
             Ø 15 = 3 x 5 factored in 2001; 21 = 3 x 7 factored in 2012.




   • Fundamental ques3on. Does P = BQP?
                                                                                                 quantum analog of P
                                                                                       (bounded error quantum polynomial time)
                                                                                                                                 66
Slides by Kevin Wayne. Copyright © 2005 Pearson-Addison Wesley. All rights reserved.
