     Algorithm Design and Analysis(H)
     Southern University of Science and Technology
     Mengxuan Wu
     12212006



                                     Final Exam
                                      Mengxuan Wu


   This final exam paper has been reconstructed from memory, and as a result, some
details may be missing. I hope it serves as a useful reference and aid for future students.


Problem 1: Greedy
     You have n suspicious transactions, each occurring at time ti with an error tolerance
ei . A new account also has n transactions occurring at times mi . The i-th transaction
from the new account can be linked to the j-th transaction from the old account if the
time difference is within the error tolerance, i.e., |mi − tj | ≤ ej . Each transaction can only
be linked once.
     Design an algorithm to determine if all n transactions from the old account can be
linked to transactions from the new account. An O(n2 ) time complexity is acceptable.
Explain why your algorithm is correct.


Problem 2: Divide and Conquer
    A node in a complete binary tree is considered a local minimum if its value is less than
or equal to the values of all its neighbors (not just its children).
    Design an algorithm to find a local minimum in a complete binary tree with O(log n)
time complexity, starting from the root node (n is the number of nodes in the tree). You
only know the value of a node when you visit it. Explain why your algorithm is correct.


Problem 3: Dynamic Programming
    As the manager of a computer shop, you can buy new computers at a fixed price P at
the start of each month (no matter how many computers you buy, the price will always be
P ). Each month i, ci computers will be sold immediately. Unsold computers are stored
in a warehouse with capacity W and a monthly storage fee F per computer. Given the
number of computers sold over n months, design an algorithm to minimize the total cost
of buying and storing computers. The time complexity of your algorithm should be a
polynomial in n and W .
Algorithm Design and Analysis(H): Final Exam                                   Mengxuan Wu



Problem 4: Polynomial Time Reduction
   Two algorithms are defined as follows:

   • VERTEX-COVER: Determines in polynomial time if a graph G has a vertex cover
     of size k.

   • FIND-VERTEX-COVER: Finds a vertex cover of size k for a graph G in polynomial
     time.

    Prove that VERTEX-COVER and FIND-VERTEX-COVER are polynomial-time equiv-
alent, i.e., VERTEX-COVER ≡p FIND-VERTEX-COVER.


Problem 5: Network Flow
    You have a computer with operating system A and n software programs. A new
operating system B is installed on the same computer. Transplanting software i from
A to B gives a performance improvement of pi ≥ 0. Some software program pairs i
and j work closely together: if only one of them is transplanted, there’s a performance
degradation of dij ≥ 0. Software 1 cannot be transplanted to B.
    Design an algorithm to maximize the net performance improvement after transplanting
the software programs. Explain the correctness of your algorithm (excluding the network
flow algorithm’s correctness).


Problem 6: Randomized Algorithm
   To find a four-coloring of a graph G, an edge is considered satisfied if its two endpoints
have different colors. Design a randomized algorithm to color G such that at least 34 of
the edges are satisfied. Explain why your algorithm is correct.




                                               2
Algorithm Design and Analysis(H): Final Exam                                   Mengxuan Wu



                                       Solutions
   The solutions are from myself and may not be the best solutions.


Problem 1: Greedy
   Initialize an empty bipartite graph with n vertices on each side. If the i-th transaction
from the new account can be linked to the j-th transaction from the old account, add an
edge between the i-th on the left side and the j-th on the right side. Run the extended
Gale-Shapley algorithm to find a maximum matching. If the matching is perfect, all
transactions can be linked.


Problem 2: Divide and Conquer
   To achieve O(log n) time complexity, obviously we go through the tree in a binary
search manner.
  Algorithm 1: Find-Local-Minimum
   Input: Graph G, root node r
   Output: Local minimum
   Binary-Search(G, r);

 Algorithm 2: Binary-Search
  Input: Graph G, current node v
  Output: Local minimum
  if v is a leaf node then
      return v;
  end
  if v is smaller than both children then
      return v;
  end
  if v’s left child is smaller than v then
      return Binary-Search(G, v’s left child);
  end
  return Binary-Search(G, v’s right child);


Problem 3: Dynamic Programming
    Let dp[i][j] be the minimum cost of buying and storing computers for the first i months
with j computers in the warehouse. The recurrence relation is as follows:
                (
                  dp[i − 1][k] + F · k     if k = j + ci , i.e., do not buy any new computers
dp[i][j] = min
                  dp[i − 1][k] + P + F · k if k < j + ci , i.e., not enough computers in the warehouse


Problem 4: Polynomial Time Reduction
   Omitted since it’s presented in the lecture slides.


                                               3
Algorithm Design and Analysis(H): Final Exam                              Mengxuan Wu



Problem 5: Network Flow
     Similar to image segmentation problem, we can construct a graph with n nodes rep-
resenting the software programs and extra nodes s and t. For each software program i,
add an edge from s to i with capacity pi and an edge from i to t with capacity ∞. For
each software program pair i and j, add edges from i to j and from j to i with capacity
dij . Run a maximum flow algorithm to find the maximum net performance improvement.


Problem 6: Randomized Algorithm
    Same as the 78 -approximation algorithm for SAT, which is presented in the lecture
slides.




                                               4
